stochastic optimization (so) methods are optimization methods that generate and use random variables. for stochastic problems, the random variables appear in the formulation of the optimization problem itself, which involves random objective functions or random constraints. stochastic optimization methods also include methods with random iterates. some stochastic optimization methods use random iterates to solve stochastic problems, combining both meanings of stochastic optimization.
stochastic optimization methods generalize deterministic methods for deterministic problems.


== methods for stochastic functions ==
partly random input data arise in such areas as real-time estimation and control, simulation-based optimization where monte carlo simulations are run as estimates of an actual system, and problems where there is experimental (random) error in the measurements of the criterion.  in such cases, knowledge that the function values are contaminated by random "noise" leads naturally to algorithms that use statistical inference tools to estimate the "true" values of the function and/or make statistically optimal decisions about the next steps.  methods of this class include:

stochastic approximation (sa), by robbins and monro (1951)
stochastic gradient descent
finite-difference sa by kiefer and wolfowitz (1952)
simultaneous perturbation sa by spall (1992)
scenario optimization


== randomized search methods ==

on the other hand, even when the data set consists of precise measurements, some methods  introduce randomness into the search-process to accelerate progress. such randomness can also make the method less sensitive to modeling errors.  further, the injected randomness may enable the method to escape a local optimum and eventually to approach a global optimum.   indeed, this randomization principle is known to be a simple and effective way to obtain algorithms with almost certain good performance uniformly across many data sets, for many sorts of problems.  stochastic optimization methods of this kind include:

simulated annealing by s. kirkpatrick, c. d. gelatt and m. p. vecchi (1983)
quantum annealing
probability collectives by d.h. wolpert, s.r. bieniawski and d.g. rajnarayan (2011)
reactive search optimization (rso) by roberto battiti, g. tecchiolli (1994), recently reviewed in the reference book 
cross-entropy method by rubinstein and kroese (2004)
random search by anatoly zhigljavsky (1991)
informational search 
stochastic tunneling
parallel tempering a.k.a. replica exchange
stochastic hill climbing
swarm algorithms
evolutionary algorithms
genetic algorithms by holland (1975)
evolution strategies
cascade object optimization & modification algorithm (2016)in contrast, some authors have argued that randomization can only improve a deterministic algorithm if the deterministic algorithm was poorly designed in the first place.fred w. glover argues that reliance on random elements may prevent the development of more intelligent and better deterministic components. the way in which results of stochastic optimization algorithms are usually presented (e.g., presenting only the average, or even the best, out of n runs without any mention of the spread), may also result in a positive bias towards randomness.


== see also ==
global optimization
machine learning
scenario optimization
gaussian process
state space model
model predictive control
nonlinear programming
entropic value at risk


== references ==


== further reading ==
michalewicz, z. and fogel, d. b. (2000), how to solve it: modern heuristics, springer-verlag, new york.
"psa: a novel optimization algorithm based on survival rules of porcellio scaber", y. zhang and s. li


== external links ==
cosp