the v-dem institute (varieties of democracy) is an independent research institute founded by professor staffan i. lindberg in 2014 and is funded by a number of government organizations, world bank and several research institutions. the headquarters of the project is based at the department of political science, university of gothenburg, sweden.varieties of democracy is a new approach to conceptualizing and measuring democracy around the world. the v-dem project distinguishes among five high-level principles of democracy: electoral, liberal, participatory, deliberative, and egalitarian, and collects data to measure these principles.the dataset is updated, expanded, and released every year. based on the current data, v-dem publishes an annual democracy report that describes the state of democracy in the world. the democracy report, the dataset, scientific articles, and working papers are free to download on the institute’s website that also features interactive graphic tools.
the v-dem institute's measures of democracy are the most elaborate and granular among several democracy indexes (such as the polity data series and freedom house's freedom in the world). by 2020, the v-dem index had "more than 470 indicators, 82 mid-level indices, and 5 high-level indices covering 202 polities from the period of 1789–2019." each indicator is coded independently by at least five country experts. v-dem uses methodological tools to deal with rating reliability and confidence intervals in the expert ratings. political scientist daniel hegedus describes v-dem as "as the most important provider of quantitative democracy data for scholarly research."


== democracy indices ==
v-dem has 5 high level indices which correspond to each of the five high level principles of democracy it identifies.
the electoral democracy index: this index measures the principle of electoral or representative democracy, including whether elections were free and fair, as well as the prevalence of a free and independent media. this index is part of all the other indices as a central component of democracy.
liberal democracy index: this index incorporates measures of rule of law, checks and balances, and civil liberties along with the concepts measured in the electoral democracy index.
participatory democracy index: this index measures the degree to which citizens participate in their own government through local democratic institutions, civil society organizations, direct democracy, and the concepts measured in the electoral democracy index.
deliberative democracy index: this index measures the degree to which decisions are made in the best interest of the people as opposed to due to coercion or narrow interest groups, in addition to the basic electoral democracy index.
egalitarian democracy index: this index measures the level of equal access to resources, power, and freedoms across various groups within a society, in addition to the level of electoral democracy.


== rankings ==
the table below shows how countries score on the 11th edition of v-dem's democracy indices in 2020.


== impact and usage ==
a variety of other organizations use v-dem's dataset in the construction of their indicators. usaid's journey to self reliance country roadmap uses v-dem's data to inform three of its indicators: liberal democracy (from v-dem's liberal democracy index), social group equality (from v-dem's social group equality in respect for civil liberties) and civil society and media effectiveness (from v-dem's diagonal accountability index). the world bank's worldwide governance indicators also use v-dem's data to inform their control of corruption indicator (includes v-dem's corruption index), rule of law indicator (includes v-dem's liberal component index), and the voice and accountability indicator (includes v-dem's expanded freedom of expression, freedom of association, and clean elections indicators).


== digital society project ==
the digital society project is a subset of indicators on v-dem's survey which asks questions about the political status of social media and the internet. specifically, the digital society project measures a range of questions related to internet censorship, misinformation online, and internet shutdowns. this annual report includes 35 indicators assessing five areas: disinformation, digital media freedom, state regulation of digital media, polarization of online media, and online social cleavages. it has been updated each year starting in 2019, with data covering from 2000-2021. similar to other expert analyses like freedom house, these data are more prone to false positives when compared with remotely sensed data, such as that from access now or the opennet initiative.


== references ==


== further reading ==
max fisher, "u.s. allies drive much of world’s democratic decline, data shows: washington-aligned countries backslid at nearly double the rate of non-allies, data shows, complicating long-held assumptions about american influence" new york times nov 16, 2021


== external links ==
official website