in mathematics and physics, a vector is an element of a vector space.
for many specific vector spaces, the vectors have received specific names, which are listed below. in general, a euclidean vector is a geometric object with both length and direction, which is frequently represented as an arrow which starting point is arbitrary and thus chosen for convenience. such vectors can be added to each other or scaled using vector algebra. correspondingly, an ensemble of vectors is called a vector space. these objects are the subject of linear algebra and can be characterized by their dimension.
historically, vectors were introduced in geometry and physics (typically in mechanics) before the formalization of the concept of a vector space. (in fact, the latin word vector means "carrier".) therefore, one often talks about vectors without specifying the vector space to which they belong. specifically, in a euclidean space, one considers spatial vectors, also called euclidean vectors which are used to represent quantities that have both magnitude and direction, and may be added, subtracted and scaled (i.e. multiplied by a real number) for forming a vector space.


== vectors in euclidean geometry ==


== vector spaces ==


=== concepts related to vector spaces ===
specific vectors in a vector spacezero vector (sometimes also called null vector and denoted by 
  
    
      
        
          0
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle \mathbf {0} }
  ), the additive identity in a vector space. in a normed vector space, it is the unique vector of norm zero. in a euclidean vector space, it is the unique vector of length zero.
basis vector, an element of a given basis of a vector space.
unit vector, a vector in a normed vector space whose norm is 1, or a euclidean vector of length one.
isotropic vector or null vector, in a vector space with a quadratic form, a non-zero vector for which the form is zero. if a null vector exists, the quadratic form is said an isotropic quadratic form.vectors in specific vector spacescolumn vector, a matrix with only one column. the column vectors with a fixed number of rows form a vector space.
row vector, a matrix with only one row. the row vectors with a fixed number of columns form a vector space.
coordinate vector, the n-tuple of the coordinates of a vector on a basis of n elements. for a vector space over a field f, these n-tuples form the vector space 
  
    
      
        
          f
          
            n
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle f^{n}}
   (where the operation are pointwise addition and scalar multiplication).
displacement vector, a vector that specifies the change in position of a point relative to a previous position. displacement vectors belong to the vector space of translations.
position vector of a point, the displacement vector from a reference point (called the origin) to the point. a position vector represents the position of a point in a euclidean space or an affine space.
velocity vector, the derivative, with respect to time, of the position vector. it does not depend of the choice of the origin, and, thus belongs to the vector space of translations.
pseudovector, also called axial vector
covector, an element of the dual of a vector space. in an inner product space, the inner product defines an isomorphism between the space and its dual, which may make difficult to distinguish a covector from a vector. the distinction becomes apparent when one changes coordinates (non-orthogonally).
tangent vector, an element of the tangent space of a curve, a surface or, more generally, a differential manifold at a given point (these tangent spaces are naturally endowed with a structure of vector space)
normal vector or simply normal, in a euclidean space or, more generally, in an inner product space, a vector that is perpendicular to a tangent space at a point.
gradient, the coordinates vector of the partial derivatives of a function of several real variables. in a euclidean space the gradient gives the magnitude and direction of maximum increase of a scalar field. the gradient is a covector that is normal to a level curve.
four-vector, in the theory of relativity, a vector in a four-dimensional real vector space called minkowski space


== vectors in algebras ==
every algebra over a field is a vector space, but elements of an algebra are generally not called vectors. however, in some cases, they are called vectors, mainly due to historical reasons.

vector quaternion, a quaternion with a zero real part
multivector or p-vector, an element of the exterior algebra of a vector space.
spinors, also called spin vectors, have been introduced for extending the notion of rotation vector. in fact, rotation vectors represent well rotations locally, but not globally, because a closed loop in the space of rotation vectors may induce a curve in the space of rotations that is not a loop. also, the manifold of rotation vectors is orientable, while the manifold of rotations is not. spinors are elements of a vector subspace of some clifford algebra.
witt vector, an infinite sequence of elements of a commutative ring, which belongs to an algebra over this ring, and has been introduced for handling carry propagation in the operations on p-adic numbers.


== data represented by vectors ==
the set 
  
    
      
        
          
            r
          
          
            n
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle \mathbb {r} ^{n}}
   of tuples of n real numbers has a natural structure of vector space defined by component-wise addition and scalar multiplication. it is common to call these tuples vectors, even in contexts where vector-space operations do not apply. more generally, when some data can be represented naturally by vectors, they are often called vectors even when addition and scalar multiplication of vectors are not valid operations on these data. here are some examples.

rotation vector, a euclidean vector whose direction is that of the axis of a rotation and magnitude is the angle of the rotation.
burgers vector, a vector that represents the magnitude and direction of the lattice distortion of dislocation in a crystal lattice
interval vector, in musical set theory, an array that expresses the intervallic content of a pitch-class set
probability vector, in statistics, a vector with non-negative entries that sum to one.
random vector or multivariate random variable, in statistics, a set of real-valued random variables that may be correlated. however, a random vector may also refer to a random variable that takes its values in a vector space.
logical vector, a vector of 0s and 1s (booleans).


== see also ==
vector (disambiguation)


=== vector spaces with more structure ===
graded vector space, a type of vector space that includes the extra structure of gradation
normed vector space, a vector space on which a norm is defined
hilbert space
ordered vector space, a vector space equipped with a partial order
super vector space, name for a z2-graded vector space
symplectic vector space, a vector space v equipped with a non-degenerate, skew-symmetric, bilinear form
topological vector space, a blend of topological structure with the algebraic concept of a vector space


=== vector fields ===
a vector field is a vector-valued function that, generally, has a domain of the same dimension (as a manifold) as its codomain,

conservative vector field, a vector field that is the gradient of a scalar potential field
hamiltonian vector field, a vector field defined for any energy function or hamiltonian
killing vector field, a vector field on a riemannian manifold
solenoidal vector field, a vector field with zero divergence
vector potential, a vector field whose curl is a given vector field
vector flow, a set of closely related concepts of the flow determined by a vector field


=== miscellaneous ===
ricci calculus
vector analysis, a textbook on vector calculus by wilson, first published in 1901, which did much to standardize the notation and vocabulary of three-dimensional linear algebra and vector calculus
vector bundle, a topological construction that makes precise the idea of a family of vector spaces parameterized by another space
vector calculus, a branch of mathematics concerned with differentiation and integration of vector fields
vector differential, or del, a vector differential operator represented by the nabla symbol 
  
    
      
        ∇
      
    
    {\displaystyle \nabla }
  
vector laplacian, the vector laplace operator, denoted by 
  
    
      
        
          ∇
          
            2
          
        
      
    
    {\displaystyle \nabla ^{2}}
  , is a differential operator defined over a vector field
vector notation, common notation used when working with vectors
vector operator, a type of differential operator used in vector calculus
vector product, or cross product, an operation on two vectors in a three-dimensional euclidean space, producing a third three-dimensional euclidean vector
vector projection, also known as vector resolute or vector component, a linear mapping producing a vector parallel to a second vector
vector-valued function, a function that has a vector space as a codomain
vectorization (mathematics), a linear transformation that converts a matrix into a column vector
vector autoregression, an econometric model used to capture the evolution and the interdependencies between multiple time series
vector boson, a boson with the spin quantum number equal to 1
vector measure, a function defined on a family of sets and taking vector values satisfying certain properties
vector meson, a meson with total spin 1 and odd parity
vector quantization, a quantization technique used in signal processing
vector soliton, a solitary wave with multiple components coupled together that maintains its shape during propagation
vector synthesis, a type of audio synthesis


== notes ==


== references ==
heinbockel, j. h. (2001). introduction to tensor calculus and continuum mechanics. trafford publishing. isbn 1-55369-133-4.
itô, kiyosi (1993). encyclopedic dictionary of mathematics (2nd ed.). mit press. isbn 978-0-262-59020-4.
ivanov, a.b. (2001) [1994], "vector", encyclopedia of mathematics, ems press
pedoe, daniel (1988). geometry: a comprehensive course. dover. isbn 0-486-65812-0.